---
title: "Music as a Performing Art - A Traditional Perspective"
date: 2020-05-25
image: "../../../images/chant-raga.png"
description: "I am S. Balachander, an Indian classical musician and a performing artist of Chandraveena. In my long association with music, I have been privileged to have had deep and meaningful discussions on the theory of music with my Ustad, and undertaken further study of scriptures to understand our music better. Here I share my reading of what a Raga Alapana and Pallavi is. Read on to find out more!"
---

If I say "Indian Classical Music", I am quite sure you know what form of music I am referring to. However, the term *Classical* in Indian Classical Music is a bit of a misnomer.

In Western [Art Music](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Art_music), the term *Classical* can be applied in two ways. In a strict sense, it refers to music of the [Classical period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_period_(music)), while in a broader sense it refers to music rooted in [classical traditions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classical_music) but including music from before the Classical period all the way up to its contemporary forms.

However, in Indian Art Music, there is no specific Classical period. Rather the [story of Indian music](/blog/history-of-indian-music/) has been one of continuous evolution over a period of 1500 years. Despite many changes and a long evolution, many of the fundamental principles of Indian Ragas and Raga-based music have been around for many centuries. A more appropriate term for Indian Classical Music would be *Shastriya Sangeet* or music based on *Shastras* (scriptures).

All Indian performing arts (music, dance, drama, etc) have two major aspects - *Lakshya* (presentation) and *Lakshana* (grammar). A scripture related to *Lakshana* is referred to as a *Lakshanagrantha* (book of grammar). A few examples of Lakshangranthas related to music are *Sangeet Ratnakar*, *Dattilam*, *Svaramelakalanidhi*, *Chaturdandi Prakasika*, etc. These books have been written by eminent scholars, musicians and musicologists like *Sarangdev*, *Dattil*, *Raamamatya*, *Venkatmakhin*, among others.

Our music was not always like we know and understand today. As music evolved, many great musicians and musicologists have played a role in contributing to the Indian Classical Music as we know it today. Lakshana and Lakshaya go hand in hand. In some instances lakshana was formed after lakshya to give a framework, and in other instances, lakshya follows lakshana. To have a full command over Indian Classical Music, I feel it is imperative to have a proper understanding of both lakshya and lakshana for a lack of one will lead to misinterpretation of the other.

As a natural part of evolution, certain aspects of lakshya and lakshana were modified, some new forms came in place, some forms became obsolete, certain terminologies were carried over with a different context etc. In my opinion, the introduction of the concept of *Adhara Shadaj* (reference tonic note) was a turning point in our music. According to my understanding, this is likely to have happened between 13th century - 16 century. It is not yet clear to me what led to the change, or what were the influences, but music changed so much so that I would actually classify Indian Classical Music as pre-Adhara Shadaj era and post-Adhara Shadaj era. Pre-Adhara Shadaj era music was based on Murchchana (Scales) and Jatis (modes), a system in which every scale change gave rise to a new Jati or melody. Post-Adhara Shadaj era, as we know it today, is based on performing a musical scale to a single reference tonic note. As such, the concept of scale change became irrelevant. Ragas, as the Jatis now are known, are classified in a variety of ways - Raga / Ragini system, Melakartha system, Janaka / Janya system, Thaat system etc. The system to follow to some extent depends on the school/style of music wherein the artist has been trained, and partly also the artists' choice. The system of Raga and Raga classification is outside the purview of this article, and is a vast subject in itself.

